Yeah, so I'm Aurool and Jakard is
the @proto library that I wrote.
And yeah, first, I'm going to do a bit
about me.
I'm an embedded and at this point everything else developer.
I design electronics.
Atproto kind of hit me like a truck like it
did a lot of people here.
And yeah, got kind of -- yeah, very, very
into it.
I was trying to figure out something that felt right to contribute
to the atmosphere, a bunch of different things.
And yeah, this is -- Jakard and a few different
things I've done are -- yeah, what you might call
spite-driven development.
This was a point where -- yeah, we had -- there
were plenty of atproto libraries at the time, but
they all kind of sucked to work with, especially back when
I started.
There were a couple of notable exceptions, but none of them
were in Rust, which was my language of choice for a
bunch of reasons to get into.
I ended up putting another project on hold because I got frustrated
and some other friends had similar conversations.
And yeah, a lot of this came down to issues
with code generation from -- yeah, from lexicons,
GraphQL, everything you generate, you have how you specify
what you want, and then you need code that does that
, you either hand write it or more likely you generate it
from some state, be that JSON, be that GraphQL
, be that whatever.
And unfortunately, most of these fucking suck.
You end up -- so you generate all the -- you generate
all your bindings.
You spend way more time, or these days, LL
M tokens writing code around them to make them actually usable.
This isn't just an app problem, but it hurts more
here, both because lexicons and a lot of them
, and especially in the ecosystem for people wanting to not just
play in Blue Sky Sandbox.
But we do not have to live like this.
And in as much as this talk is about the thing that
I'm doing, it's also a, no, this
is something everybody else can do in whatever language, whatever you
can -- we can do this better, especially now.
And so, yeah, it's like why Rust for me
?
This was my language, and it is kind of at this
point the only language you can run it literally pretty much anywhere
, and it's actually not completely stupid.
You can run a lot of things a lot of places,
but you would be hard to find defensible reasons.
You can at least find defensible reasons for Rust, although
there's -- if you're running Rust on your full stack
, you better be my kind of pervert.
Yeah.
And so, yeah, it has a -- excuse me --
it has a reputation as a difficult and demanding language.
The reputation is sort of deserved and sort of not.
And, of course, a lot of Rust libraries go a
long way to improving on that state.
And, of course, yeah, it's like one of
the reasons why I am a fan of it is that,
essentially, like, especially coming, for me, from the
sea world, the things Rust forces you to think of,
the things that people consider demanding difficult, are the things you
need to think of anyway, and it makes them explicit.
And, of course, like, the whole point, we
can make the sharp edges easier if we care to.
Yeah.
And, again, we do not have to live like this
.
And, of course -- and this is the thing -- this
is peripheral to sort of the whole talk, but this is
one of the things that I came out -- ran into that
I didn't necessarily expect in the development of Jaccard
.
And it's basically parse don't validate can only take you
so far.
This is kind of a truism that you get,
and especially among Rust devs, among functional programmers.
But the thing is that, like, there's a limit
, especially depending on how your language handles errors.
Yeah.
If surdayjson or surdaycbor can't
parse something as the type you're asking of it, you
will just get an error.
It does not give you the partial.
And this is not something that I've got a good solution
for.
But it also -- but that lack of good solution for it
gets us to a different place.
And -- hang on.
I've just got -- and so, yeah
.
And so, yeah, it's like atrium previous go
-to at ProtoRustCrate.
They had typed numbers, the number -- it wasn't just
int 60 -- i64, i32, i8.
It had a -- it would have a type, and that
type encoded the limits, which is cool.
It's very -- it's very interesting.
In theory, in practice, it's a huge pain in
the ass, and this is partially the fault of Rust.
Rust type system does not handle that very well.
And Jaccard, until recently, mostly just put these
as code comments and generated APIs.
Just fix that.
And yeah, it's kind of the thing.
And yeah.
And of course, one of the challenges is, like,
you've got methods for partial understanding.
And this is something that I've really tried to push as
far as possible in this without -- where you can have arbitrary
data.
And I will tell you that that's a lot of what
's going on in the back end here.
And I'll show you more about that in a minute.
Where'd the -- where'd the timeline go?
Oh.
Oh, so, overall.
Off of that.
Anyhow.
But yeah.
So, it's like, Jaccard has a data
type, which is at ProtoInformed.
It says all of this.
It tries to derive, understand, just by looking at the
JSON or CBOAR, what it is, what it
's likely to be.
And to work with reform data in useful ways.
But it doesn't, of course, handle the scenario where
you have something that almost fits, but doesn't.
For example, you have a -- and I already showed you
in the next slide, or the next bit.
For example, you have a whole feed of posts, and
one of them has an invalid handle.
One of them has -- or something, yeah, something else
that doesn't validate, but handle is the really common one
.
And yeah, this was downstream of a GitHub issue I got
early on in the development.
And yeah, it's just a shitty developer experience, a
shitty user experience to have to do that because you don't
have to fall back.
You don't have all your -- like, yeah, it
's like in Jaccard, you would have this,
which is good, but it's still not your type.
You have to do all this extra work.
Yeah.
And so, yeah, it's like that is, for
example, why Jaccard has a carve out for the
specific invalid handle, and there's a few other things like
that in the library.
The decision of when to do that versus not has been a
fun thing.
It's time to follow this back, and there's a
time to refrain.
And yeah.
All right.
We'll see.
Keep getting off this.
And so, yeah, as much as -- and so this
is sort of -- yeah, it's like my pitch,
obviously, for my thing, and I think everybody else can
-- like, this is -- like, we're all getting
better at this in this ecosystem, but we can go so
much further, is, like, you have stuff that does
your -- does the -- does the work that it can for
you, make it very, very easy, pluggable
, so that in the Rust case, this is -- everything
is traits.
Everything is generic, but not generic in a way that screws
-- that is a lot of work, has got good default
s.
And then, yeah, obviously, for me, it's
like API code gen that you can just work with.
Like, it ends up being reasonably pretty as of a few
weeks ago.
And yeah.
Jacquard, if you're familiar with Rust, you know
lifetimes.
Lifetimes are everybody's favorite thing, and they're
important, but they're also one of the things that I
got the most comments on, is, like, this makes
this harder, and I didn't want to have that be
a barrier.
And yeah, honestly, it's funny, because, like
, I didn't actually -- I knew sort of when I
started writing the library that picking this would -- picking this fight
would be a barrier.
But I kind of assumed everybody would figure it out.
And I also couldn't -- and also, honestly, I
didn't -- I hadn't figured out a good way around
it until, amusingly, I was looking through some of
FIG's code and found a really interesting library there,
which we'll discuss in a moment.
Oh, before I go back to that, what you're
seeing in the background -- a little catch up to real time
here, and we'll see -- this is the time hel
ix.
It was, like, I got -- it was, like
, this so amusingly.
This was -- yeah, it was, like, I was
wanting to do some sort of visualization.
And not sure exactly how to end up.
And this was -- this was where I landed because somebody posted
this and just, like, kind of, nerd snipe
the hell out of me.
And so this is Jetstream.
This is -- everything coming in, well, it's one
in ten of everything -- of everything of blue skies, everything
of everything else.
And yeah, so you can see -- and you can see
how, as we go here, like, as whatever I
'm messing over shows things.
And so this is actually, again -- yeah, so this
is hitting these -- like, obviously, some of the data
is in the Jetstream data itself.
But then it's also pulling on the refs and,
of course, constellation, fig, photo for the win.
Getting some of that.
Yeah.
And again, it's, like, doing, kind of
, as generic -- like, a generic UI thing.
And the fun thing is that -- let me get back over
here and see if -- see if we can make this happen
, because you've seen me editing text, and that's
how I've been editing the slides.
If I -- I will probably break something, but we'll
see.
You will.
Yeah.
Let's see.
Why did we want to -- because, yeah, this is
all running on this very, very hardworking little i5
here, so -- on the conference Wi-Fi, so
I'm impressed it's held up as well as it has
.
But, yeah.
And so, yeah, as you can go -- yeah,
so you can -- yeah, it hits the blue sky app
for you to get the profiles, just because that was easy
.
Yeah.
But -- where is it gone?
I'm finding -- I'm trying to find my damn --
yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
No, I'm not going to -- I'm not going
to -- I'm not going to go way too far into
this.
But, yeah, you can get -- and, yeah,
you can, like, change things, and, yeah,
it's like, a lot of this is -- so,
yeah, so what this actually is -- this is Bevy
game engine.
This is, like, their UI library just rendering all the
slides.
And I can -- and, yeah, it's like,
it's hot reloading everything from the disk.
And so everything sort of streams there, and -- because,
yeah, like, the other fun things.
And so, yeah, it was, like, this was
something just, like, over a couple weeks, and kind
of go.
And -- but, yeah, and this is all sort of
very straightforward.
And a lot of this is as easy as it is because
of services, because of tools everybody else has built here.
Like, everybody in this ecosystem stands on the shoulders of giants
, and, yeah.
You are making a dent in Flingshot metrics.
I bet.
I bet I am right now.
I'm very sorry.
I will -- Okay.
Yeah.
I wasn't sure how badly that would show up because,
yeah, I am hitting that quite a lot.
Yeah.
All right.
And -- oh, yeah.
The other thing.
I'm going to -- yeah.
One more.
Because, yeah.
Like I was saying, with the borrowing -- oh, yes
.
I'm forgetting I need to get the window back and focus
There we -- so, yeah.
It's like this is why you ended up with borrowing.
It's like you can either do unsafe in Rust, you
can do separate borrowed own types, and then you -- so
you end up -- okay.
And now, like, Rust is language that has eight types
of strings in the default.
So, yeah.
That plus however many -- at proto lexicons, that
didn't feel achievable.
And there's a, like, kind of, like,
ByteMuck or -- and then there's the bor
rower share, which was the thing that I found.
And so, yeah.
Jacquard is getting some fun things like that that made this
all possible in the sense that it's -- oh, yeah
.
It's a little harder.
And let me -- let me pull something over from my display
here.
So, yeah.
This is -- this is the presentation.
There's the slides.
The QR code.
And, yeah.
A lot of this is bevy.
This is very fun.
But, yeah.
And then you can kind of hit.
Yeah.
And so, actually, this provides -- let me minimize this
.
How big is the font here?
Is this too small or too large?
Okay.
So, yeah.
And this is actually kind of a good illustration because Jacquard
provides a WebSocket client, runs on the Tokyo runtime
.
Bevy doesn't really like that.
So, this is basically a real implementation on the small as
ync runtime.
It's like one little source file because it's a very
simple trait.
And then you can immediately plug in everything else in Jacquard
.
Just pick that one bit out.
There you go.
And I didn't end up using -- oh, we'll
get to that.
I didn't end up using this because I did end up
using Tokyo and request.
So, this -- but, of course, Bevy's
sync -- Bevy is not async friendly, which makes
a lot of sense for as a game engine.
But you can just do -- yeah.
So, again, this is another -- like Jacquard has
a client trait.
And this is an implementation of it.
And on top of that, there is a sync trait and
a polling version of it that supports.
And, again, it follows in the same pattern.
So, you interact with it pretty much the same way.
And, yeah.
It's like this is sort of example-wise and not
intended for, like, use.
But you get the idea for -- yeah.
Like, this is -- this is why I like what I
've built because it makes this kind of thing a lot more
straightforward than it would have been otherwise.
Because, yeah.
Like, if -- I don't know any -- yeah.
Is there anybody else working with some of the others?
It's like, okay.
So, I want to color outside the lines.
How do I color outside the lines?
The goal is for that to be easy.
And for coloring inside the lines to be rewarding.
So, yeah.
And -- I'm on.
Yeah.
That's kind of my presentation.
I don't know how -- I've got lots of time
.
But I figured -- yeah.
Yeah, we've got lots of time for questions.
So, does anyone have any?
Yeah.
Yes.
I'll just wait so the streamers can hear.
I'm actually wondering about your background there.
Mm-hmm.
Because this was -- I saw on BlueSky someone posted
-- I don't know.
-- the person on Nerds next to you about vibe coding
something like this.
What?
Oh, cool.
Yeah.
That's pretty neat, though.
That's pretty neat though.
And in terms of, okay, how do you maintain a
quality, how do you maintain a quality, how do you
maintain a quality, you know, like, and honestly,
I can't write more.
So this is because I want to go to the office,
and then it's still, oh, that one stuck with
it.
Oh, I actually, how do I, how do I
turn the back on?
So I'm going to switch, yeah.
Oh, sorry, there we go.
My bad.
Yeah.
Right, yeah.
And so, how far back was that turned off?
I'm trying to get it.
Or do we just want to move on?
Anybody?
Yeah.
Next question.
I saw a few more hands here.
Yes.
So cool.
I want to know, like, what are the kind of
recursive helices in your visualization represent?
It's basically intervals of time.
This is like the largest is, I want to say,
what did I end up, what did we end up with
here?
Yeah, so it's like, you ended up with,
like, sub-second level time, and then you ended
up with, like, about, yeah, it was like
, kind of seconds, minutes, sub-second, yeah
.
Because, of course, Jetstream is so fast.
And if you noticed, when you have the slides, when
you have the slides up, it slows down, and you
see it go past, and then pull the slides down,
it catches back up.
And you can also pause and go back and far around
.
This gets a little laggy as it pulls things in,
but, yeah.
There's an SQLite database that this all gets dumped into
for all the past events.
The colors are different lexicons, actually, so it
's, yeah, it's, like, it's mostly
the common ones, and then it's, like, you
see the little, see the little yellow ones?
Those are non-Blue Sky lexicons.
Most of them will be account events.
That's the common one.
One thing that I've, one thing that I'm curious
about, and actually, let's go look.
Because, yeah, let's go, let's, can
we get back?
There was a, there we go, we got, we
got there.
There's this little, I keep seeing these little clusters,
where it's, like, a bunch of, yeah,
they're follows.
Yeah, I wonder if this is, like, somebody subscribing
to a starter pack?
Could be.
Or bots, definitely could be bots.
Bots and starter packs.
All the, all the, all the blue wave people following
20,000 people.
Yeah, I'm just, like, I wonder if you
could, like, just talk to, like, how,
at a high level, it kind of is using jac
quard, like, in the visualization.
See, honestly, this is, this is very high,
yeah.
So this is pretty high level in the sense that, like
, like I said, I, like, I did re
-implement a couple of the traits because I needed to
.
But in terms of, where is it?
Yeah, it's, like, this is, this is
most, this is the spot that has a hit, a
bunch of jacquard stuff, and you're going
to scroll through a bunch of bevy UI stuff here.
But you can see, this is, yeah, it's
, like, Jetstream messages, and then pulling out.
And a lot of this is, like, using, kind
of, the partial understanding stuff, jacquard's
, arbitrary data type.
And you kind of, where is it going?
But, yeah, and it pulls out embeds.
And, actually, where did that go?
I kind of remember where I had that.
Because I did, in here, I'm trying to find
it, but I also just don't want to, like
, try to, like, control F for it.
Yeah.
Yeah, okay, yeah, so this is, this is
a fun one.
So, this is the response types for constellation.
Yeah, and this is a struct for it, did collection
, r key, we just, yeah, just did strings
for simplicity, and this is the get backlinks query,
blue.
microcosm.
links.
get backlinks.
This derives XRPC request, and this basically generates
all the code that drives everything else.
Yes, and so when you, and so how jac
quard works is, as we get in here, okay
, yeah, this is, does it have, does this
function have the call in it?
Yes, it does.
So, yeah, so this is a get profile call.
This is going, hitting the blue sky app view, and
you basically just send it.
This is, this is, this is, implement this on
the ATV client, yeah.
And you just send it, and you await, and then
you match on the response.
You match into output, this gives you a nice owned,
easy-to-work-with version.
There's also parse that borrows from the buffer, and
then, yeah, and so if you get a success,
or you get the defined XRPC errors, also,
again, from the lexicon, and, yeah,
this is doing a lot of handling with that.
And then, yeah, this is the request enrichment.
This is where we're hitting slingshot.
And, again, like, jacquard actually has
a built-in slingshot helper that just hits it
, which I need to change to use the blue.
microcosm.
But, yeah, and so, again, fetch record sl
ingshot, and jacquard also has fetch record
, or get record, that gives you a specific collection type
.
If you want a profile, it will give you the generated
profile struct.
And, yeah, this is for arbitrary data, which is
why it's hitting that.
And, again, yeah, you can kind of, and
here's constellation, yeah.
And so, you know, if the constellation-based URL
, and then construct the query, XRPC, send
it.
Yeah.
Incredible, thank you.
So, yeah.
Yeah, it's like, this, yeah, this is
, that's kind of, yeah, it's like,
that's kind of how it works.
That's how you use it.
You don't, and the whole goal is that you don
't need to do a whole lot.
Beyond.
Awesome.
We have time for maybe one or two more questions, if
there's any more in the audience.
Yeah.
Yeah, could you speak again on what the
, did you say that you did make refactor to the
lifetime challenges, or you have intended ideas?
Oh, so, there, yes, I have.
No, I've got, is it, good?
Yeah.
Okay.
So, yeah, up on Tangled, there is a
beta branch, boss, BOS dash beta, and that
, I did this over last weekend, not this one,
yeah, good lord, not this one.
Yeah, over the previous weekend, I did refactor away
, and that's why you're not seeing a whole bunch
of lifetimes in here.
This is, this is the beta of that, and so
, yeah, I didn't want to go straight to,
like, pushing that to main, because there are still some
things that is broken on it, in particular, the le
xicon, there's a, there's a, yeah
, it's like, there's a lexicon-
derived macro that still needs a bunch of fixing, but
, and I'm sure there are a bunch of other bugs
.
I found a couple when I was building this, and so
, yeah, that, and, yeah, it's like
, that makes a lot of things much more possible, especially
around interprocess communication, for example, the Deoxys
library has a, does not, it requires you to have
the deserialized owned constraint, which Jacquard previously
cannot support, and now can.
So, yeah, yeah, if people want to try out
the beta, it's there, if, I can,
I can maybe cargo publish it as, like, a beta
version, if that's better for people, but, yeah
.
Awesome, thank you so much, Aruel.
- Thank you.
- This was very inspiring.